## 3 Learning Dynamics of LLM's Finetuning

Although learning dynamics have been applied to many deep learning systems, extending this framework to LLM finetuning is non-trivial. The first problem is the **high dimensionality** and the **sequence nature** of both the input and output signals. The high-dimensional property makes it hard to observe the model's output, and the sequential nature makes the distributions on different tokens mutually dependent, which is more complicated than a standard multi-label classification problem considered by most previous work. Furthermore, as there are many different algorithms for LLM finetuning — SFT (Wei et al. [46]), RLHF (Ouyang et al. [27]), DPO (Rafailov et al. [32]), etc. — analyzing them under a uniform framework is challenging. Finally, compared with the training-from-scratch scenario, where a roughly uniform distribution over all possible outputs is usually assumed, LLMs' finetuning dynamics heavily rely on the pretrained base model, which could make the analysis harder. For example, the pretrained model usually assigns little probability mass to unlikely tokens, which is good for most applications but leads to risk of the **"squeezing effect"** we show later. We now tackle these problems and propose a unified framework for different finetuning methods.

### 3.1 Per-step Decomposition of the SFT Loss

The typical loss function used during supervised finetuning is the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of a given completion $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} = [y_{1}^{+}, \ldots, y_{L}^{+}] \in \mathcal{V}^{L}$, conditioned on the prompt $\mathbf{x}_{u}$:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{SFT}}(\mathbf{x}_{u}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}) \triangleq -\sum_{l=1}^{L} \log \pi(y = y_{l}^{+} \mid \mathbf{y}_{<l}^{+}, \mathbf{x}_{u}) = -\sum_{l=1}^{L} \mathbf{e}_{y_{l}^{+}} \cdot \log \pi(\mathbf{y} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u}, \mathbf{y}_{<l}^{+}). \tag{4}
$$

Note that compared with the multi-label classification problem discussed before, where the joint distribution of all labels can be factorized as $\pi(\mathbf{y} \mid \mathbf{x}) = \prod_{l} \pi(y_{l} \mid \mathbf{x})$, the sequential nature of language modeling makes the analysis more complicated, because we must have $\pi(\mathbf{y} \mid \mathbf{x}) = \prod_{l} \pi(y_{l} \mid \mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{<l})$. To solve this problem, we can merge this factorization into the definition of the backbone $h_{\theta}$ while keeping the format of Proposition 1. Specifically, letting $\chi$ be the concatenation of $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}$, the prediction of all tokens of $\mathbf{y}$ is:

$$
\mathbf{z} = h_{\theta}(\chi); \quad \pi(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi) = \mathsf{Softmax\_column}(\mathbf{z}).
$$

Here $\mathbf{z}$ is a $V \times L$ matrix where each column contains the logits of the prediction of the $l$-th token. Our $h_{\theta}$, even though it takes the entire sequence $\chi$ as its input, will force the model not to refer to the future tokens $\mathbf{y}_{>l}$ when making predictions on the $l$-th token, commonly implemented via **"causal masking"** (proposed in Vaswani et al. [44], details in Figure 10a of Appendix D). Then, we can calculate $(\nabla_{\boldsymbol{\theta}} \mathbf{z}_{l}(\chi_{o})|_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}) (\nabla_{\boldsymbol{\theta}} \mathbf{z}_{l}(\chi_{u})|_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}})^{\intercal}$ on each column of $\mathbf{z}$ and stack them to form a $V \times V \times M \times L$ tensor $\mathcal{K}^{t}(\chi_{o}, \chi_{u})$. The calculation of $\mathcal{G}^{t}$ and $\mathcal{A}^{t}$ follows a similar procedure. Thanks to the causal mask implemented in $h_{\theta}$, the resulting decomposition is almost identical to that in a multi-label classification problem. Assuming we have a response $\mathbf{y}_{u}$ of length $L$ associated with $\mathbf{x}_{u}$, stacked into $\chi_{u}$, and $\mathbf{y}_{o}$ of length $M$ associated with $\mathbf{x}_{o}$, stacked into $\chi_{o}$, the change of the model's prediction on the $m$-th token of $\mathbf{y}_{o}$ can be represented as, when $\mathbf{z}$ gradients have bounded norm:

$$
\underbrace{[\Delta \log \pi^{t}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{o})]_{m}}_{V \times M} = -\sum_{l=1}^{L} \eta [\underbrace{\mathcal{A}^{t}(\chi_{o})}_{V \times V \times M}]_{m} [\underbrace{\mathcal{K}^{t}(\chi_{o}, \chi_{u})}_{V \times V \times M \times L}]_{m,l} [\underbrace{\mathcal{G}^{t}(\chi_{u})}_{V \times L}]_{l} + \mathcal{O}(\eta^{2}), \tag{5}
$$

where $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{SFT}}^{t}(\chi_{u}) = \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u}) - \mathbf{y}_{u}$. Compared with Proposition 1, the main difference is that the eNTK term also depends on the responses $\mathbf{y}_{u}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{o}$, which allows us to answer questions like:

> For a prompt $\mathbf{x}_{u}$, how does learning the response $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ influence the model's belief about a response $\mathbf{y}_{u}'$?

When tracking the model's confidence on different responses given the question $\mathbf{x}_{u}$, learning from $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ will impose a strong **"upwards" pressure** on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, as illustrated in the first panel of Figure 2. At the same time, the confidence of **"similar responses"** will also be slightly pulled up, like how learning a 4 influences the prediction on 9 in the MNIST example. We will discuss how to understand the "similarity" between two sequences of responses in the next section.

### 3.2 Per-step Decomposition of the DPO Loss

Preference finetuning, which teaches the model to provide responses that align better with human preferences, is also an important phase in LLM finetuning pipelines. Different from the SFT stage above, where the training tells the model "what to do," many preference finetuning methods also teach the model **"what not to do,"** which makes the learning dynamics more complex. For intuition, we start by analyzing a typical method, i.e., DPO (direct preference optimization, an RL-free method), under a similar framework. Following Rafailov et al. [32], the loss function of off-policy DPO is:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{DPO}}(\boldsymbol{\theta}) = -\mathbb{E}_{(\mathbf{x}_{u}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}) \sim \mathcal{D}} \left[ \log \sigma \left( \beta \log \frac{\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+})}{\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+})} - \beta \log \frac{\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-} \mid \chi_{u}^{-})}{\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-} \mid \chi_{u}^{-})} \right) \right], \tag{6}
$$

where $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are pre-generated responses, and $\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}$ is the reference model, typically the result of SFT. $\chi_{u}^{+}$ and $\chi_{u}^{-}$ share the same $\mathbf{x}$ but different $\mathbf{y}$. In the loss function, the $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ terms are also calculated using **teacher forcing**. Hence we can decompose the learning dynamics for DPO similarly to Equation (5):

$$
\begin{aligned}
[\Delta \log \pi^{t}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{o})]_{m} = -\sum_{l=1}^{L} \eta [\mathcal{A}^{t}(\chi_{o})]_{m} \left( [\mathcal{K}^{t}(\chi_{o}, \chi_{u}^{+})]_{m,l} [\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}+}^{t}]_{l} - [\mathcal{K}^{t}(\chi_{o}, \chi_{u}^{-})]_{m,l} [\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}-}^{t}]_{l} \right) + \mathcal{O}(\eta^{2}) \\[6pt]
\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}+}^{t} = \beta(1-a)\left(\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u}^{+}) - \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}\right); \quad \mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}-}^{t} = \beta(1-a)\left(\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u}^{-}) - \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}\right), \tag{7}
\end{aligned}
$$

where $a$ is the margin (i.e., the $\sigma(\cdot)$ value) for the $l$-th token, which represents how well the current policy separates $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ compared with the reference policy. Due to the monotonicity of $\sigma(\cdot)$, a larger margin leads to larger $a$, which in turn restrains the strength of $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}+/-}^{t}$. In other words, $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}+/-}^{t}$ automatically provides less energy on the examples that are already well separated. We then check the role of $\beta$, which controls the regularizing effect on the KL distance between $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ and $\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}$ in the original RL loss (Rafailov et al. [32]). When the margin is negative, larger $\beta$ leads to a smaller $a$ and hence provides stronger $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}+/-}^{t}$ for the model to "catch up" the separating ability of the reference model faster. But when the model is better and has a positive margin, increasing $\beta$ will increase $a$ and hence create a negative influence on $\beta(1-a)$, which makes the model update less. This aligns well with the claims of Rafailov et al. [32]: the stronger regularizing effect tends to "drag $\pi_{\theta}$ back towards $\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}$" when its predictions deviate from $\pi_{\mathrm{ref}}$ too much. The derivation and the $\mathcal{G}^{t}$ functions for other RL-free methods are given in Appendix B.2.2.

These analyses make no assumptions on where $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ come from. Hence our framework can be directly extended to **on-policy RL-free methods**, which often perform better than their off-policy counterparts (S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. [16]; Tajwar et al. [42]). The main difference between these algorithms is how the supervisory responses are generated. Off-policy methods typically use a fixed pre-collected dataset, with $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ generated by another LLM or humans. In other words, it is likely that both the chosen and rejected responses come from the "less likely" region of the model's prediction. On-policy responses, though, are more likely to have higher predicted probabilities under this model, as they were sampled from it. We will show next that imposing large negative pressure on an unlikely prediction will lead to unexpected behavior, giving a new explanation for why on-policy sampling is important for algorithms with large negative gradients.

### 3.3 The Squeezing Effect Caused by Negative Gradient

As demonstrated by the first two panels in Figure 2, the use of large negative gradients is the main difference between the learning dynamics of SFT and DPO. We will show later that this difference is the key to understanding why the learning curves of SFT and DPO behave so differently. For example, Pal et al. [28], Rafailov et al. [31], and Tajwar et al. [42] (and our Figure 4) reported that the confidence of both $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ gradually decreases when conducting DPO, while the confidence of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ rarely drops during SFT. This trend becomes more serious if $\pi_{\theta^{0}}$ is finetuned for longer before conducting DPO (reported in Figure 3 of Rafailov et al. [31] and verified by our Figure 17). Furthermore, we also find that for all the $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u})$ we track (various responses similar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ or $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$; details in the next section), **none of them increase** during the DPO phase. This is different from SFT and quite counter-intuitive:

> **If everything we observe is becoming less confident, where has the probability mass gone?**

To answer this question, we first identify a phenomenon we call the **squeezing effect**, which occurs when using negative gradients from any model outputting a distribution with Softmax output heads, even in a simple multi-class logistic regression task. Specifically, in the $L = 1$ case when we impose a negative gradient on label $\mathsf{y}_{u}^{-}$, we can describe the changing of model's predictive distribution $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t+1}}$ as follows:

- **Guarantee:** the confidence of $\mathsf{y}_{u}^{-}$, i.e., $\pi_{\theta^{t+1}}(\mathsf{y}_{u}^{-})$, will decrease.
- **Guarantee:** the decreased probability mass is largely **"squeezed"** into the output which was most confident before the update: if $\mathbf{y}^{*} = \mathrm{argmax}_{i \in [V] \setminus \{\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}\}} \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} = i)$, then $\pi_{\theta^{t+1}}(\mathbf{y} = \mathbf{y}^{*})$ will increase.
- **Trend: the rich get richer and the poor get poorer.** Generally, dimensions with high $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ tend to increase, and those with low $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ tend to decrease.
- **Trend: peakier $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ squeezes more.** If the probability mass concentrates on few dimensions in $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$, which is common for a pretrained model, all $\pi_{\theta^{t+1}}(\mathbf{y} \neq \mathbf{y}^{*})$ decrease (only $\mathbf{y}^{*}$ is "rich").
- **Trend: smaller $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ exacerbates the squeezing effect.** If $\mathsf{y}_{u}^{-}$ is unlikely under $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$, the probability mass of all other $\pi_{\theta^{t+1}}(\mathbf{y} \neq \mathbf{y}^{*})$ will be more seriously decreased, and the $\boldsymbol{\pi}_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t+1}}(\mathbf{y} = \mathbf{y}^{*})$ increases more.

Appendix E illustrates the squeezing effect and analytically proves its existence for logistic regression models, by directly computing $\pi_{\theta^{t+1}} / \pi_{\theta^{t}}$ in different situations. Section 4.2 also experimentally verifies the analysis above in real LLM experiments. Note that in practical settings, where both positive and negative pressures and the auto-regressive nature are strictly considered, the squeezing effect can become more complicated. The differences between the two eNTK terms in Equation (7) also influence the relative strength and direction of these two pressures. Razin et al. [33] analyze a similar problem in a token-level setting, and their conclusions align with ours well. We leave a more detailed analysis to our future work.

We can now get a high-level overview of the learning dynamics of a typical off-policy DPO algorithm. Since both $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are not sampled from the model's distribution, $\mathbf{y}^{*}$ sometimes can be dissimilar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, and the $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are likely located in a valley region of the model's prediction. Then its learning dynamics would look like the sketch in the second panel of Figure 2: the confidence on almost all $\mathbf{y}$ are pushed down. At the same time, all the decreased probability mass is squeezed to $\mathbf{y}^{*}$, which might make the model keep generating repeated phrases, as reported by Holtzman et al. [19]. Variants of DPO algorithms often unintentionally mitigate this squeezing effect by constraining the strength of the negative gradient or the positions of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, which partially explains their benefits. The last four panels in Figure 2 and Appendix B.2.2 have more details.
