## 4 Experimental Verifications

We now verify our analysis in practical settings. We first create the training set $\mathcal{D}_{\text{train}}$ by randomly selecting 5000 examples from the training split of the dataset. We consider two common datasets, **Anthropic-HH** (Y. Bai et al. [4]) and **UltraFeedback** (G. Cui et al. [10]), in all experiments. Each example in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{train}}$ contains three components: the prompt (or question) $\mathbf{x}$, the preferred response $\mathbf{y}^{+}$, and the less preferred response $\mathbf{y}^{-}$. SFT finetunes with $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}^{+}$, while DPO uses all three (subscripts of $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}$ are removed for conciseness). We repeat the experiments on two series of models: `Pythia-410M/1B/1.4B/2.8B` (Biderman et al. [5]) and `Qwen1.5-0.5B/1.8B` (J. Bai et al. [3]).

To get a more detailed observation of the learning dynamics, we further create a probing dataset $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ by randomly selecting 500 examples from $\mathcal{D}_{\text{train}}$, and generate several typical responses based on the corresponding $\mathbf{x}$, $\mathbf{y}^{+}$, or $\mathbf{y}^{-}$ (We also study another probing dataset where all $\mathbf{x}$ come from the test set in an ablation study in the appendix.) Then for each $\mathbf{x}$ in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$, we can observe how $\log \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \mathbf{x})$ gradually changes on different types of $\mathbf{y}$. For example, one extended response type can be a rephrase of $\mathbf{y}^{+}$, an irrelevant response answering another question $\mathbf{x}'$, or just a randomly generated English sentence with the same number of words as $\mathbf{y}^{+}$. We explain why we need these extended responses and how they are generated in detail in Appendix D.1. In short, $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ helps us to get a more fine-grained inspection of the learning dynamics, which can not only support our analysis above, but also shed more light on how the model's prediction evolves on the entire $\mathcal{V} \in \mathbb{R}^{V \times L}$, a very sparse and huge space.

### 4.1 Learning Dynamics of SFT

The main lesson we learn from the analysis in Section 3.1 is that learning from $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ not only increases the model's confidence on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, but also indirectly **"pulls up"** responses similar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ with a smaller strength (scaled roughly by $\|\mathcal{K}^{t}\|_{F}$), similar to how learning "4" influences the prediction of "9" in the MNIST example. At the same time, the increase of $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u})$ naturally **"pushes down"** all $\mathbf{y} \neq \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, because the model's predicted probability to all responses in $\mathcal{D}$-space must sum to one. The model's behavior on different $\mathbf{y}$ is mostly a trade-off among these pressures. To verify this claim, we finetune the model for several epochs and evaluate the model's prediction on all responses in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ every 25 updates (with a training batch size of 4, the probing occurs every 100 examples). For each type of response, we average the model's confidence on all 500 examples and report the mean value of their log-likelihood.

As demonstrated in the first panel of Figure 3, the model's confidence on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ keeps increasing throughout the whole learning process, which is straightforward because the main "pull-up" pressure is imposed directly on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. However, the behavior of some responses similar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ is non-trivial. For example, we draw the following types of responses in the same panel, i.e., the less preferred response for the same question $(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$, two types of rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ generated by ChatGPT $(\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{+})$, another preferred response randomly selected from the test set $(\mathbf{y}_{\text{test}}^{+})$, or even a randomly generated English sentence $(\mathbf{y}_{\text{hum}})$. The model's confidence in these responses are all **slightly increased at the beginning of training**, and then gradually decrease as the training goes on, even though the model never sees them during SFT. This counter-intuitive behavior can be well explained by the learning dynamics we discussed before. Since all these examples are "similar" to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ to some extent (at least, they are all common "standard English" sentences), their $\|\mathcal{K}^{t}\|_{F}$ are reasonably large. Then learning $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ will indirectly increase the model's confidence of these similar $\mathbf{y}$. That is why the corresponding $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u})$ are slightly increased at the beginning of training. However, as the training goes on, the model's confidence on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ keeps increasing and the update energy, the norm of $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{SFT}}^{t}$ in Equation (5), gradually decreases. That means the indirect "pull-up" pressures are also diminished accordingly. Then, the **"push-down" pressure** on all $\mathbf{y} \neq \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ becomes dominant and all the related curves start going down.

To verify the existence of this global "push-down" pressure, we observe two types of responses; both have the same number of words as their $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. One is a purely random English word sequence $\mathbf{y}_{\text{rnd}}$. Another is a random permutation of all the words in $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, which is called $\mathbf{y}_{\text{urnd}}^{+}$. Since both are not natural language, we expect the $\|\mathcal{K}^{t}\|_{F}$ between them and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ to be very small, which means learning from $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ imposes almost no "pull-up" pressure on them; thus the "push-down" pressure will dominate through the whole training procedure. These analyses are well supported by the second panel in Figure 3, in which we see these $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u})$ all start from a very small value, and keep decreasing throughout the training.

Another interesting type of responses is $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}$, a preferred response for another question $\mathbf{x}_{j \neq u}$ in the training set. For these responses, the model's prediction on $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u})$ will be kept influenced by two "pull-up" pressures: one is from learning $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$, another is from learning $[\mathbf{x}_{j \neq u}; \mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}]$, where the latter might be even stronger as the gradient is directly calculated by observing $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}$. That explains why we see the confidence on $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}$ keeps increasing with a smaller rate compared with $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ in the third panel. Because the "pull-up" pressure is always strong enough to counter the "push-down" one. These observations provide us with a unique explanation of why **specific types of hallucinations are amplified after SFT**. Specifically, the increase of $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u})$ means if we ask the model to answer a question $\mathbf{x}_{u}$, it might provide a response from (or partially from) another unrelated question $\mathbf{x}_{j \neq u}$ in the training set.

Last, to further explore the "similarity" between different responses from the model's perspective, we SFT the model using more types of responses and observe how $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}}(\mathbf{y}' \mid \chi_{u})$ changes accordingly. The results are demonstrated in Figure 3, where the blue and orange colors represent the positive and negative influence respectively. The X-axis is the updating response while the Y-axis denotes the observing response. Hence the first column resembles how different $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}']$ changes when we SFT the model using $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$. One interesting finding is that **all responses generated by ChatGPT are considered very similar to each other**, regardless of how semantically different they are. Probably, LLM has its preferred idioms or phrases, which could be considered as a type of **"fingerprint"**. We left this interesting problem for our future work.

### 4.2 Learning Dynamics of Off-Policy DPO

To verify our framework also explains the model's behavior in preference tuning, we conduct similar experiments for DPO. Recall the residual term $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}}^{t}$ introduces a pair of arrows on both $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, with different directions. To show how these two pressures influence the model, we check two types of rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ or $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ ($\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{+}$, $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{+}$, $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{-}$, and $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{-}$, used in the previous experiment). See the three curves in the first panel in Figure 4, where the two rephrases decrease at a similar speed, faster than the decay of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. That is because the upward pressure is directly imposed on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ rather than these rephrases. Similarly, in the second panel, we observe that $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ decays faster than its rephrases, because $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}}^{t}$ directly imposes a negative pressure on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$. Then in the third panel, we find the rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ consistently decay slower than those of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ although none of them ever occur during training. That is because these responses are close to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ or $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ in $\mathcal{Y}$, which means their $\|\mathcal{K}^{t}\|_{F}$ is relatively large. Hence the pressures imposed on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ also introduce a non-negligible influence on them. Last, in the fourth panel, the margin $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}) - \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-} \mid \chi_{u})$ keeps increasing, which means the model is gaining the ability to separate $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ as the training goes on.

Although $\mathcal{G}_{\mathrm{DPO}}^{t}$ directly imposes a "pull-up" pressure on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, the value of $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u})$ does not increase a lot as it does in SFT. The downward arrow on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ indeed introduces a "push-down" pressure on responses that are similar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, but the influence is unlikely to be that strong (it will be weakened by $\|\mathcal{K}^{t}\|_{F}$) to make the confidence on almost every observing responses decrease so fast, as demonstrated in the last panel of Figure 3 where we use similar $\eta$ for both SFT and DPO. Then, **where has the probability mass gone during DPO?** The key to answering this question is the **squeezing effect** discussed in Section 3.3: since the big negative gradient is imposed on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, which is at this point probably in a region of low $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y} \mid \chi_{u})$, the confidence of most $\mathbf{y}$ will be decreased and $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}^{*} \mid \mathbf{x}_{u})$ will increase very fast.

To verify this, we report the log-likelihood of $\mathbf{y}$ chosen by greedy decoding: each token is chosen by maximizing the conditional probability given $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{<l}^{+}]$ in real-time, where $\mathbf{y}_{<l}^{+}$ is a sub-sequence of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. As illustrated by the last panel of Figure 4, the confidence of this "teacher forcing" greedy $\mathbf{y}$ increases very fast (from **-113 to -63**), which is even faster than the increase of $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u})$ during SFT (from -130 to -90), within 8 epochs. However, the tokens with the highest confidence do not necessarily form a preferred response: it will reinforce the prior bias in $\theta^{0}$. This could be a reasonable explanation of the **"degeneration"** reported in recent work (e.g. Holtzman et al. [19]): as $\pi_{\theta^{t}}$ becomes more peaky at its most confident predictions, it is easier to sample sequences with repeated phrases. Note that such behavior could also be understood as a special type of **self-bias amplifying** (Ren et al. [36]), which would bring more serious consequences if it is combined with a multiple-generation self-improving algorithm, e.g. self-reward (Yuan et al. [51]), iterative DPO (Xiong et al. [49]), etc.

In summary, the behaviors of different types of responses all match our analyses well. More subtle trends of different responses support our story well (both for SFT and DPO). Due to space constraints, we explain these (and the full results on other models and datasets) in Appendix D.

### 4.3 Mitigating the Squeezing Effect by Augmenting the Training Set for SFT

Since the "squeezing effect" caused by the big negative gradient on unlikely predictions can damage the model's performance during DPO, we can first train the model on both $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$ and $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}]$ during the SFT stage (making the negative response more likely), and then run the usual DPO. Following the analysis above, we can expect during this new SFT stage, the region of those responses similar to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ or $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ will be "pulled up" simultaneously. This is what we want because in many cases, both $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are reasonably good responses for the question $\mathbf{x}_{u}$; the new SFT design hence helps to pull up a larger region that contains more suitable responses compared with the baseline SFT. After that, the "push-down" pressure imposed during DPO can efficiently decrease the model's confidence on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ and its similar responses. Since $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ is no longer so unlikely before DPO, the squeezing effect should not be as strong as in the baseline procedure.

We call our training pipeline **"extend"** and compare its learning dynamics with the baseline setting in Figure 5. It is clear that the squeezing effect is mitigated, because the confidence of other responses all decays slower during DPO, and we also observe a big drop in the greedy-decoding response when DPO starts. To further show that mitigating the squeezing effect indeed brings benefits, we compare the responses generated by models trained using different methods by feeding them to ChatGPT and Claude3. Specifically, we first SFT the model for two epochs using two methods discussed above and call the resulting policy network $\pi_{\text{base}}$ and $\pi_{\text{extend}}$. Then, we conduct identical DPO training on both $\pi_{\text{base}}$ and $\pi_{\text{extend}}$ for several epochs. The win rate of the proposed method against the baseline one is provided in Table 1. It is clear that before DPO, $\pi_{\text{base}}$ is better, because $\pi_{\text{extend}}$ is explicitly trained on those $\mathbf{y}^{-}$. However, $\pi_{\text{extend}}$ performs better after DPO several epochs since the squeezing effect is efficiently mitigated. Please refer to Appendix F for more details. In the future, this simple method inspired by our analysis could be further improved by introducing more responses, e.g., rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, etc., during both stages, and also by combining with many existing RL-free methods we mentioned before.

**Table 1: Win-rate against baseline.**

| DPO Ep. | ChatGPT | Claude |
|:-------:|:-------:|:------:|
| 0 | 0.4729 | 0.4679 |
| 2 | **0.6518** | **0.5151** |
| 4 | **0.6928** | **0.6045** |
| 6 | **0.6667** | **0.5432** |
