## A More Related Works

### A.1 More About Learning Dynamics

Beyond their application to LLMs, learning dynamics are widely utilized in analyzing various machine learning problems. For example, if we consider $\mathsf{x}_{u}$ from the training set, and $\mathsf{x}_{o}$ from the test set, this form of learning dynamics provides a new perspective on generalization: the model generalizes better if the loss of $f_{\theta}(\mathsf{x}_{o})$ keeps decreasing when it learns from $\mathsf{x}_{u}$. By studying the influence of different $\mathsf{x}_{u}$ at different stages during supervised learning, Ren et al. [37] explain a **"zigzag" pattern** of the learning path, which sheds light on why the model can spontaneously pursue better supervisory signals and correct noisy labels in the early stage of training (see also S. Liu et al. [25]). Kumar et al. [23] and Ren, S. Guo, et al. [34] apply learning dynamics to explain why directly finetuning a well-trained backbone with a randomly initialized task head might harm the out-of-distribution generalization ability. Ren et al. [35], Ren, Lavoie, et al. [38], and Ren and Sutherland [39] also explain where the simplicity bias favoring compositional representations comes from during knowledge distillation (Hinton et al. [18]), providing a new perspective of understanding why successive knowledge transferring can improve the model's systematic generalization ability.

The network's **local elasticity** (He and Su [17]) and **stiffness** (Fort et al. [13]) are also correlated with this topic. It reveals that neural networks operate like adaptive local learners, influencing only nearby points in feature space during training. This gives them a unique edge over linear models in terms of memorization, stability, and the emergence of meaningful internal structure — all without explicit regularization. The authors of Deng et al. [11] further link this behavior to the model's generalization ability. Extending their theoretical framework to more complicated settings like LLMs' finetuning might be a promising direction.

Besides explaining the model's behavior, learning dynamics is also helpful for evaluating the quality or the effectiveness of different training samples. For example, Pruthi et al. [30] propose a quantitative metric called **TracIn** to compute the influence of a training example on the predictions made by the model. This metric is then applied by Xia et al. [48] to search for the most influential examples in LLM instruction finetuning. By expanding Equation (1) in the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime, S. Guo, Ren, et al. [15] propose a metric called **lpNTK** to measure the relative difficulty among different training samples. These metrics and analyses inspired by learning dynamics are expected to be helpful in many related fields, like coreset selection (Feldman [12]), active learning (Settles [41]) (see, e.g., Mohamadi et al. [26]), and dataset distillation (T. Wang et al. [45]).

### A.2 More About LLM's Finetuning

In this paper, we broadly define finetuning as any in-weight learning on top of a pretrained base model, including supervised finetuning (SFT), direct policy optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al. [32]) and its variants, etc. Since the analysis throughout this paper relies on the **"teacher forcing"** mechanism and the relatively stable eNTK assumption, our framework cannot be directly applied to algorithms with token-wise supervision like reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF, Ouyang et al. [27]) and proximal policy optimization (PPO, Schulman et al. [40]). We leave the study of the token-wise learning dynamics, which aligns better with the "squeezing effect" in real settings, to future work.

We also identify several related works that report similar observations on the phenomena discussed in this paper. For example, Gekhman et al. [14] and Yue Zhang et al. [53] mentioned that learning new facts during SFT tends to make the model hallucinate more, which aligns with our finding that the model tends to use $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq i}^{+}$ when answering question $i$. Holtzman et al. [19] related the peakiness of the model's distribution to LLM's **"repeater phenomena"**, which also indirectly supports our claims well: more DPO leads to a more serious squeezing effect, hence the model's prediction becomes peakier on most tokens, which makes the aforementioned phenomena more common.

Furthermore, the **"confidence decaying on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$"** attracts more attention in the community, because it is quite counter-intuitive and the vanilla off-policy DPO algorithm works reasonably well in most cases. Many related works study this phenomenon by analyzing the major discrepancy between off-policy DPO and PPO, i.e., where the samples used to train the model come from, e.g., S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. [16], Rafailov et al. [31], and Tang et al. [43]. They showed that when the responses are off-policy sampled, the learning process may fail to benefit from the contrastive information in the data. In other words, we should be more careful when working on the **"valley" region** of the model's distribution. Other works try to analyze this problem by inspecting the token-level influence between responses. For example, Pal et al. [28] assumes $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are identical except one token. Under this assumption, the model's confidence of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ after the identical token is guaranteed to decrease. They propose a solution by significantly enhancing the learning rate (roughly **50× larger** when their $\lambda = 50$) of the positive part when detecting $\mathbf{y}_{u}$ located in a low-confidence region. Razin et al. [33] takes the similarity between the hidden embeddings and the geometry of the readout layer of different responses into account. Most of the conclusions of their paper align with ours well. The main discrepancy lies in the squeezing effect part, which we will discuss in our future work (they do not contradict each other, but need a more detailed analysis to understand the whole story).

### A.3 Benign and Harmful Negative Gradient

The **"squeezing effect"** can negatively impact our analysis when it is strongly imposed in a valley region of the model. However, a well-regulated negative gradient is both beneficial and commonly observed in many deep-learning systems. For example, it is common in many **"machine unlearning"** algorithms, e.g., in R. Zhang et al. [52]. Moreover, even in the field of LLM finetuning, we can find many mechanisms in different popular algorithms that can mitigate this effect. For example, the typical learning rate of DPO is usually smaller than that used in SFT, which unintentionally mitigates the harmful squeezing effect. The on-policy counterpart of the DPO-like algorithms is shown to perform better than their off-policy counterparts, which also supports our claims. Furthermore, we find the PPO loss automatically avoids imposing a big negative gradient (when its $\hat{A}_{t}$ is negative) on the valley region (when its $\pi_{\theta}$ is small).

On the other hand, the effect that negative gradients make the model's distribution peakier is independently reported in many related works. For example, Equation 1 in Caccia et al. [6] shows that we are minimizing a negative thing in a standard GAN loss, which might explain why peakiness occurs. Furthermore, in Table 1 and Table 2 of Choshen et al. [8], we see the peakiness (measured by $\Delta p_{\text{top10}}$, $\Delta p_{\text{mode}}$) of the "PG-average" method is stronger than the standard PG method. Note that the "PG-average" method will map a reward ranging from 0 to 1 to a centered one ranging from -0.5 to 0.5. Since the negative reward can introduce a negative gradient, the peakiness increases.
