## D More About Experiments

This section provides more experimental details and results about the learning dynamics to support our claim. We will first discuss how different types of responses are selected in our probing dataset $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$. These responses can fit into a 2-D space where one dimension is semantical relevance of the response to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. We then provide more results and discussions on different models and settings. The subtle differences between the responses all support our story well.

### D.1 The Selection of Response Types for the Probing Dataset

Besides the sequential nature of the loss function, another conundrum in analyzing LLM learning dynamics is the huge response space $\mathcal{Y}$: the number of possible $\mathbf{y} \in \mathcal{Y}$ is $V^{L}$, but the vast majority of possible sequences look nothing like natural language, and we expect the model to generate only a subset of natural language-like responses. These properties prevent us from observing the changes of all possible $\mathbf{y}$ like what we did for MNIST. Instead, we define several interesting regions of $\mathcal{Y}$, and select corresponding typical responses to observe. Intuitively, we can use the semantic relevance between $\mathbf{y}$ and $\mathbf{x}_{u}$ as a heuristic. Such a measurement can be understood as "how suitable this $\mathbf{y}$ is as a response to $\mathbf{x}_{u}$, compared to $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$." Then, starting from the structure of common preference optimization datasets such as Anthropic-HH (Y. Bai et al. [4]) and UltraFeedback (G. Cui et al. [10]), we can divide $\mathcal{Y}$ into three sub-spaces and evaluate the following types of responses (as in Figure 10b). The prompt templates used to generate them are illustrated in Figure 11. We also provide examples of all 14 types of responses in Figure 12.

**$\mathcal{D}_{\text{IF}}$: reasonable responses following the instruction $\mathbf{x}_{u}$:**

0. $\mathbf{y}_{\pi^{0}}$, the initial response generated by feeding $\mathbf{x}_{u}$ to LLM before finetuning;
1. $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, the chosen (i.e., the preferred) response to $\mathbf{x}_{u}$;
   - 1.1 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{selfr}}^{+}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ using $\pi^{0}$, algorithm from Yang et al. [50];
   - 1.2 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{+}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ using ChatGPT, keep the semantics while changing the format;
   - 1.3 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{+}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ using ChatGPT, keep the format while changing the semantics;
2. $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, the rejected (i.e., the less preferred, but still reasonable) response to $\mathbf{x}_{u}$;
   - 2.1 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{selfr}}^{-}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ using $\pi^{0}$, algorithm from Yang et al. [50];
   - 2.2 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{-}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ using ChatGPT, keep the semantics while changing the format;
   - 2.3 $\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{-}$, rephrase $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ using ChatGPT, keep the format while changing the semantics;

**$\mathcal{D}_{\text{non-IF}}$: irrelevant responses to $\mathbf{x}_{u}$ that are still recognizably human language (in these datasets, roughly "internet-standard" English):**

3. $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}$, the chosen response for a different question $\mathbf{x}_{j \neq u}$ selected from the training set.
4. $\mathbf{y}_{\text{test}}^{+}$, the chosen response of a question $\mathbf{x}_{\text{test}}$ selected from the test set.
5. $\mathbf{y}_{\text{hum}}$, a "random" English sentence generated by ChatGPT with as many words as $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$.

**$\mathcal{Y}_{\text{non-hum}}$: token sequences that do not form meaningful human language:**

6. $\mathbf{y}_{\text{urnd}}^{+}$, a random permutation of the words (space-separated strings) of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$.
7. $\mathbf{y}_{\text{rnd}}$, a random permutation of the words of a generated sentence as in $\mathbf{y}_{\text{hum}}$.

Furthermore, we also create another probing dataset (named $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$) where all $\mathbf{x}$ come from the test set. Compared with $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtrain}}$ that we used in the main context, all the prompts and responses in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$ are never exposed to the model during finetuning. By comparing the learning curves of these two probing datasets, we can figure out the difference between the model's prediction of those directly influenced responses ($\mathbf{y}$ appears during training) and the indirectly influenced ones ($\mathbf{y}$ that the model never sees during training). Finally, we believe the level of the **"on-policy"** property (which is very important for the preference finetuning, as discussed in Tajwar et al. [42]) could also be introduced as the second axis in our 2-D plane. We left the exploration of this interesting direction in our future work.

### D.2 More Results on Different Settings: SFT Case

**Consistent learning dynamics for different models.** In this subsection, we provide more results to support our analysis on SFT in Section 4.1. The first thing to verify is the consistency of the trends of learning dynamics across different settings. As illustrated in Figure 14, we conduct SFT on five models with different sizes pretrained using different recipes. Note that `Pythia-410M/1B/1.4B/2.8B` are pretrained using exactly the same dataset and pipeline (Biderman et al. [5]), while `Qwen1.5-0.5B` are pretrained differently. Hence we can observe a slight difference between the curves from Pythia series and Qwen series, e.g., those in $\mathbf{y}_{\text{hum}}$. However, the trends demonstrated in Figure 3 consistently hold for all models.

**Compare the rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$.** See Figure 15, where we put the rephrases of the same response into the same figure. We can treat the red curve, i.e., the one of $\mathbf{y}$ generated by $\pi^{0}(\mathbf{x})$, as a baseline, whose decaying suggests the policy model is deviating from the initial point. The first observation is that after several updates, $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ is the only one that keeps increasing fast, which means the "pull up" pressure generated by $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$ does not have that strong influence on these rephrases compared to $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}]$, even though these $\mathbf{y}$ are good rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ (recall the curve $\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}$ always increase in Figure 14). Furthermore, by carefully comparing the decreasing speed of $\mathbf{y}_{\pi^{0}}$ and other curves, we find those rephrases decay slower than $\mathbf{y}_{\pi^{0}}$ in the chosen case, but not the case for the rejected responses. This phenomenon also supports our analysis well: because we train the model using $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$, their rephrases are "pulled up" more than the rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$. Such a claim is also verified by the experiment in the last column of this figure, where we train the model using $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}]$ rather than $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$. In these two panels, we see the decaying speed of rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ is now identical to that of $\mathbf{y}_{\pi^{0}}$ while the decaying speed of rephrases for $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ is slightly slower. Last, compare the green and orange curves (i.e., the format-keeping and semantics-keeping GPT rephrases), we find the predicting probabilities of those format-keeping curves are usually larger than their semantic-keeping counterparts. This is a sign that the model during SFT might care more about the **format** rather than the **semantics** of one sentence. We will delve into this interesting phenomenon in our future work.

**Compare $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ and $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$.** To isolate the influence of the "pull-up" pressure introduced by the training updates, we also create another probing dataset $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$ using the same pipeline as $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$. The only difference between them is that all $\mathbf{x}$ in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$ come from the test set, and hence neither the prompts nor the responses ever occur during training. See Figure 16, where the solid curves and dotted curves represent the learning dynamics of responses in $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ and $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$ respectively. The color of the curves represents the model we are finetuning. By qualitatively comparing the trend difference between curves coming from $\mathcal{D}_{\text{prob}}$ and $\mathcal{D}_{\text{probtest}}$, we roughly observe that $\text{trend\_diff}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}) > \text{trend\_diff}(\mathbf{y}_{j \neq u}^{+}) > \text{trend\_diff}(\mathbf{y}_{\text{gpts}}^{+}) > \text{trend\_diff}(\mathbf{y}_{\text{gptf}}^{+})$, which aligns well with our hypothesis about how strong the "pull up" pressure influences different responses.

### D.3 More Results on Different Settings: Off-Policy DPO Case

Similar to Appendix D.2, we also provide extra experiments for DPO in this part using the same probing dataset. Note that as the responses of on-policy DPO change generation-by-generation, it is hard to observe the dynamics of a pre-collected probing dataset. We left the exploration of how to effectively probe other DPO variants in our future work.

**Consistent learning dynamics for different models.** Compare Figure 4 in the main context and Figure 18, where we provide the results on many different models (`Pythia-410M/1B/2.8B` and `Qwen1.5-0.5B`). Their trends on different $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ are quite consistent:

1. In the first column, the margin $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}) - \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ keeps increasing. The $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+})$ first increases and then decreases, always with a smaller decay speed than that of $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$;
2. In the second column, $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+})$ decreases slower than the other rephrases, verifying the "pull up" pressure and the influence on other responses via $\mathcal{K}^{t}$;
3. In the third column, $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ decreases faster than the other rephrases, verifying the "push down" pressure and the influence on other $\mathbf{y}$;
4. In the fourth column, the rephrases of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ decay slower than those of $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$, supporting the claims that the rephrases near the chosen responses are influenced by the "pull up" pressure while the rephrases of the rejected ones are influenced by the "push down" pressure.

**Learning dynamics of conducting SFT first, then DPO.** As stated in Ouyang et al. [27], conducting SFT before DPO is a common pipeline for alignment. Using $[\mathbf{x}_{u}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$ as the SFT dataset is also a common practice in many existing works. Hence in this part, we plot the curves of different $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ in both two stages to demonstrate their differences. See Figure 17, where the difference between the experiments in these three rows is how long the model is trained using SFT before DPO. The learning rate of both SFT and DPO are controlled to be the same (i.e., $5 \times 10^{-7}$, the default value in Tajwar et al. [42]). All the curves are aligned by the 10th epoch on the x-axis (i.e., the starting time for the DPO training) for the convenience of comparing the trends across different settings.

We first check the curves of SFT and DPO parts separately and find that all the above relative trends still hold in these experiments. We then compare the model's behavior in these two phases respectively. In the last two rows of Figure 17, where the epoch for SFT is non-zero, it is clear that the decaying speed of most observing $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ is much larger in DPO than those in SFT. The main reason for this is the existence of a big negative gradient introduced in DPO. This gradient, especially conducted on a "valley" region of the model's prediction, will "push down" the whole curve significantly, except the one with the highest confidence before updating. This non-trivial trend is named **"squeezing effect"**, which is elaborated on in Appendix E. Furthermore, a more peaky $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{0}}(\mathbf{y})$ and a smaller $\pi_{\theta^{0}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ will lead to a stronger "squeezing effect", which can be verified by comparing the curves of the last two panels: **longer SFT makes the model's prediction peakier** when DPO is conducted, which leads to a larger decay on all $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ during DPO.
