## E The Squeezing Effect Introduced by Big Negative Gradient

In DPO, the model gradually learns how to separate the chosen and rejected responses by imposing one positive and one negative adaptation vector centered at $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ respectively, as illustrated in the second panel in Figure 2. These two opposite pressures ensure the margin reward $\pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+}) - \pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-} \mid \chi_{u}^{-})$ keeps increasing, which makes the model align better with human preferences. However, if we go deeper and consider $\pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+})$ and $\pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-} \mid \chi_{u}^{-})$ separately (actually we should, because their $\chi_{u}$ are usually different), a very interesting phenomenon occurs. See the first column of Figure 18, we find although DPO also contains a strong positive adaptation vector, the curve of $\pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+})$ all goes down after several updates, which is very different from $\pi_{\theta}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+} \mid \chi_{u}^{+})$ in the SFT case. Such an observation is also reported in many related works (Pal et al. [28]; Rafailov et al. [31]; Razin et al. [33]; Tajwar et al. [42]), but a clear-cut explanation of it is still missing. Furthermore, although the relative behaviors of various rephrases matches our analysis of learning dynamics well, merely the two pressures on $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ cannot explain why all these observed $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}}(\mathbf{y})$ keeps decreasing during training. So, it is natural to ask:

> **Where has the probability mass gone?**

### E.1 The Squeezing Effect and Why It Exists

To answer the above question, we can start from the properties of the basic Softmax function by analyzing a simple multi-class logistic regression problem. Because no matter how complex the LLM is, its predictions are made by converting the logits into probabilities using Softmax heads. Note that the analysis here only considers the negative gradient, i.e., the one imposed by $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ in LLM's finetuning. As also pointed by Razin et al. [33], the pull up pressure imposed by $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ will cancel the influence imposed by $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ when their $\chi_{u}$ are identical. However, when $\chi_{u}^{+}$ and $\chi_{u}^{-}$ are dissimilar, the squeezing effect discussed in this paper still dominates. We leave analyzing this intricate interaction between these two pressures to our future work.

Consider a simple $V$-class logistic regression problem where each high-dimensional input data $\mathbf{x}$ is converted to a length-$d$ feature vector via a deep neural network. In other words, we have $\boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times 1}$. The model uses a linear read-out layer $\mathbf{w} \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times V}$ to convert the feature vector to logits $\mathbf{z} = \mathbf{w}^{\top} \phi(\mathbf{x})$ and then generate the probability prediction vector $\mathbf{p}$ using a Softmax head. We consider a common cross-entropy loss function for each input pair $(\mathbf{x}, y)$. In summary, we have:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{CE}}(\mathbf{p}^{t}, y) = -\mathbf{e}_{y}^{\top} \log \mathbf{p}^{t}; \quad \mathbf{p}^{t} = \mathrm{Softmax}(\mathbf{z}^{t}); \quad \mathbf{z}^{t} = (\mathbf{w}^{t})^{\top} \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}), \tag{32}
$$

where $t$ is the index of the step during training and $\mathbf{e}_{y}$ is a length-$V$ one-hot vector determined by the ground truth label $y$. To simplify our analysis, we assume a fixed $\phi$ and only update the parameters of the read-out layer $\mathbf{w}$ using stochastic gradient descent:

$$
\mathbf{w}^{t+1} = \mathbf{w}^{t} - \eta \nabla_{\mathbf{w}} \mathcal{L} = \mathbf{w}^{t} - \eta \phi(\mathbf{x}) (\mathbf{p}^{t} - \mathbf{e}_{y})^{\top}, \tag{33}
$$

where $\eta$ is the learning rate which can be negative if we consider a negative gradient during training. With Equation (32) and (33), we can write down each dimension of $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ and $\mathbf{p}^{t+1}$ after some calculations. To quantitatively analyze how the model's confidence in each class changes, we define a ratio $\alpha_{i} \triangleq \frac{p_{i}^{t+1}}{p_{i}^{t}}$ and use the following lemma to describe its behavior:

**Lemma 1.** The ratio of confidence change for each $i$ can be represented as:

$$
\alpha_{i} \triangleq \frac{p_{i}^{t+1}}{p_{i}^{t}} = \frac{\sum_{j=1}^{V} e^{z_{j}^{t}}}{\sum_{j=1}^{V} \beta_{j} e^{z_{j}^{t}}}. \tag{34}
$$

Note that the values of $\beta_{j}$ also depends on whether $i$ equals $y$, hence for Case 1 ($i = y$) and Case 2 ($i \neq y$) we have ($\eta' \triangleq \eta \|\phi(\mathbf{x})\|_{2}^{2}$ is the equivalent learning rate):

$$
\text{Case 1: } \beta_{j} = \begin{cases} e^{-\eta'(1 + p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t})} & \text{if } j \neq y \\ 1 & \text{if } j = y \end{cases}; \quad \text{Case 2: } \beta_{j} = \begin{cases} e^{-\eta'(p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t})} & \text{if } j \neq y \\ e^{-\eta'(p_{y}^{t} - p_{i}^{t} - 1)} & \text{if } j = y \end{cases} \tag{35}
$$

**Proof.** To derive Equation (34), we need to have the analytical expression of each $p_{i}^{t+1}$ and $p_{i}^{t}$. As $\mathbf{p} = \mathsf{Softmax}(\mathbf{z})$, we need to link $\mathbf{z}^{t+1}$ and $\mathbf{z}^{t}$ first. With Equation (32) and (33), $\mathbf{z}^{t+1}$ can be recursively written down as:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathbf{z}^{t+1} &= (\mathbf{w}^{t+1})^{\top} \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) \\
&= (\mathbf{w}^{t} - \eta \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) (\mathbf{p}^{t} - \mathbf{e}_{y})^{\top})^{\top} \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) \\
&= (\mathbf{w}^{t})^{\top} \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) - \eta (\boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) (\mathbf{p}^{t} - \mathbf{e}_{y})^{\top})^{\top} \boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x}) \\
&= \mathbf{z}^{t} - \eta \|\boldsymbol{\phi}(\mathbf{x})\|_{2}^{2} (\mathbf{p}^{t} - \mathbf{e}_{y}) \\
&= \mathbf{z}^{t} - \eta' (\mathbf{p}^{t} - \mathbf{e}_{y}) \tag{36}
\end{aligned}
$$

where $\eta' \triangleq \eta \|\phi(\mathbf{x})\|_{2}^{2}$ is the equivalent learning rate that depends on the norm of feature representation. Note that $\mathbf{z}$, $\mathbf{p}$ and $\mathbf{e}_{y}$ are all length-$V$ vectors and $y$ is an integer ranging from 1 to $V$. Then we can write down each $z_{i}^{t+1}$ as:

$$
z_{i}^{t+1} = \begin{cases} z_{i}^{t} - \eta' p_{i}^{t} + \eta', & \text{if } i = y \\ z_{i}^{t} - \eta' p_{i}^{t}, & \text{if } i \neq y \end{cases} \tag{37}
$$

Then, we can combine the definition of Softmax function and write down different $p_{i}^{t+1}$ case-by-case. For Case 1 where $i = y$, we have:

$$
p_{i=y}^{t+1} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t+1}}}{\sum_{j=1}^{V} e^{z_{j}^{t+1}}} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t} - \eta' p_{i}^{t} + \eta'}}{\sum_{j \neq y} e^{z_{j}^{t} - \eta' p_{j}^{t}} + e^{z_{y}^{t} - \eta' p_{y}^{t} + \eta'}} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t}}}{\sum_{j \neq y} e^{z_{j}^{t} - \eta'(1 + p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t})} + e^{z_{y}^{t} - 0}}, \tag{38}
$$

combining the fact that $p_{i}^{t} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t}}}{\sum_{j=1}^{K} e^{z_{j}^{t}}}$, we can derive $\alpha_{i}$ and $\beta_{j}$ as the left part of Equation (35). Similarly, when $i \neq y$, we have:

$$
p_{i \neq y}^{t+1} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t+1}}}{\sum_{j=1}^{V} e^{z_{j}^{t+1}}} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t} - \eta' p_{i}^{t}}}{\sum_{j \neq y} e^{z_{j}^{t} - \eta' p_{j}^{t}} + e^{z_{y}^{t} - \eta' p_{y}^{t} + \eta'}} = \frac{e^{z_{i}^{t}}}{\sum_{j \neq y} e^{z_{j}^{t} - \eta'(p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t})} + e^{z_{y}^{t} - \eta'(p_{y}^{t} - p_{i}^{t} - 1)}}, \tag{39}
$$

which leads to the right part of Equation (35).

We can now better understand how each $p_{i}$ changes after this update. Specifically, if $\alpha_{i} > 1$, the corresponding $p_{i}$ increases, and vice versa. To determine the value of $\alpha_{i}$, we can treat any $\beta_{j} > 1$ as contributing to the conclusion that $\alpha_{i} < 1$ while any $\beta_{j} < 1$ against it. The value of the corresponding $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$ and $|\beta_{j} - 1|$ controls how strong the contribution is. With the preparations above, we derive the following observations on how the confidence evolves when a gradient ascent (i.e., $\eta < 0$) is imposed on class $y$:

**Claim 1:** The value of $p_{y}$ is guaranteed to decrease, i.e., $\alpha_{y} < 1$. We start from the value of $\beta$ in Case 1 as illustrated in Equation (35). It is clear that for any $j \neq y$, we have $\beta_{j} > 1$, because $1 + p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t} > 0$. Combining with $\beta_{y} = 1$, it is straightforward to have Claim 1.

**Claim 2:** The value of $p_{i^{*}}$, where $i^{*} = \operatorname{argmax}_{i \in [V] \setminus \{y\}} p_{i}^{t}$, is guaranteed to increase, i.e., $\alpha_{i^{*}} > 1$. We now use the value of $\beta$ in Case 2, since $i^{*}$ cannot equal $y$ by definition. When $j \neq y$, we have $p_{j}^{t} - p_{i^{*}}^{t} \leq 0$ for all possible $j$, because $p_{i^{*}}^{t}$ is the largest among all $p_{i \neq y}^{t}$ of $\mathbf{p}^{t}$. Hence all $\beta_{j \neq y}$ must be smaller than one. Combining with the fact that $\beta_{y} < 1$ (because $p_{y}^{t} - p_{i^{*}}^{t} - 1$ must be negative), we can prove that $\alpha_{i^{*}} > 1$.

The two claims above demonstrate that the parameter update can be imagined as taking the probability mass from $p_{y}$ and redistributing that to other dimensions. From Claim 2, we know some of the mass is guaranteed to be **"squeezed"** into the dimension with the highest $p_{i^{*}}^{t}$ (if $p_{y}^{t}$ is the highest value, then $p_{i^{*}}^{t}$ is the second highest in $\mathbf{p}^{t}$). But how other $p_{i}$ change is still not clear yet. Will the probability mass from $p_{y}$ also be split into other $p_{i}$ (i.e., other $p_{i}$ increases)? Or will $p_{i^{*}}$ absorb the mass not only from $p_{y}$ but also from other dimensions (i.e., other $p_{i}$ decreases)? To get a clearer picture, we need to track the adaptations of each $p_{i}$. To achieve this, we now must scrutinize the distribution of $\mathbf{p}^{t}$, because it controls the value of $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$ for different $j$. We chose three typical scenarios where $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ is strictly uniform, slightly non-uniform, and extremely peaky, and lead to the following claims.

**Claim 3A:** When $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ is a uniform distribution, the probability mass decreased from class $y$ is uniformly distributed to all other $i \neq y$, i.e., all $p_{i \neq y}^{t+1}$ increase by the same value. With the uniform $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ assumption, Equation (34) can be simplified to $\alpha_{i} = \frac{V}{\sum_{j=1}^{V} \beta_{j}}$. Note that the first two claims hold for any distribution $\mathbf{p}^{t}$, hence we only check the values of $\alpha_{i \neq y}$ here to verify the "uniformly distributed mass" hypothesis. Substituting the values of $\beta_{j}$ to this new $\alpha$ leads to $\alpha_{i} = \frac{V}{V - 1 + e^{\eta'}}$ for all $i \neq y$. Since $\eta' < 0$ and $e^{\eta'} < 1$, we must have $\alpha_{i \neq y} > 1$. Combined with the fact that all $p_{i}^{t}$ are the same, this claim can be proved.

**Claim 3B:** When $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ is slightly non-uniform, $p_{i}$ with smaller $p_{i}^{t}$ tend to decrease, and vice versa. This claim is a general trend and might not have any guarantees. However, analyzing such a scenario helps us to understand the influence of $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ better. Assume we are observing $\alpha_{i'}$ where $i'$ is not $y$ nor $i^{*}$. We consider two subsets of $[V] \setminus \{y\}$, i.e., $\mathcal{B}$, which contains all $j$ with $p_{i'}^{t} \leq p_{j}^{t}$, and $\mathcal{S}$ that contains all $j$ with $p_{i'}^{t} > p_{j}^{t}$. Now consider Case 2 in Equation (35), we have:

$$
\beta_{j=y} \ll \beta_{j \in \mathcal{S}} < 1; \quad \beta_{j \in \mathcal{B}} > 1. \tag{40}
$$

Note that we misuse the $\ll$ notation to highlight the fact that $\beta_{j=y}$ would be much smaller than $\beta_{j \in \mathcal{S}}$, because there is a negative one term in the exponential. With the above expression, we can imagine that if $p_{i'}^{t}$ is relatively small, the size of $\mathcal{B}$ would be large, which means there will be more $\beta_{j} > 1$ contributing to the conclusion that $\alpha_{i'} < 1$. If the influence of $\beta_{j \in \mathcal{B}}$ is strong enough to override the influence of other $\beta$ (especially $\beta_{j=y}$ which is way smaller than other $\beta$), $\alpha_{i'}$ would be smaller than one and hence $p_{i'}$ decreases. On the contrary, for those $i'$ with relatively large $p_{i'}^{t}$, the $\beta < 1$ terms become dominant and hence lead to $\alpha_{i'} > 1$, i.e., $p_{i'}$ increases.

In the analysis above, we assume $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ is only slightly non-uniform (i.e., not so peaky), which means the values of different $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$ are relatively comparable. However, in practical machine learning systems like LLM's finetuning, the distribution $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ would be very non-uniform, which means most of the probability mass is obtained by a few dimensions. That is because the LLM's vocabulary size is usually very large and the reasonable choice of the next word is only a small portion of the whole vocabulary. Thus we have the following claim to describe this practical scenario.

**Claim 3C:** When $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ is very peaky, which means most of the probability mass is obtained by $i^{*}$, then all other $p_{i}$ will decrease. In other words, the probability mass of all other $p_{i}$ is squeezed to $p_{i^{*}}$. We continue the analysis in Claim 3B but consider a more extreme influence on $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$. For this peaky $\mathbf{p}^{t}$, we might have a very large $e^{z_{i^{*}}^{t}}$ that dominates $\alpha$. In other words, $\alpha_{i} \approx \frac{e^{z_{i^{*}}^{t}}}{\beta_{i^{*}} \cdot e^{z_{i^{*}}^{t}}} = \frac{1}{\beta_{i^{*}}}$. Then for any $i'$ we want to observe, $\alpha_{i'} \approx \frac{1}{\beta_{i^{*}}} < 1$. In other words, the model's predictions on all dimensions other than the one with the highest confidence in $\mathbf{p}^{t}$ will decrease.

Last, we analyze the influence of $p_{y}$ to explain why "imposing a large negative gradient on the valley region" makes the squeezing effect more serious.

**Claim 4:** Smaller $p_{y}^{t}$ makes those non-max $p_{i}$ easier to decay, i.e., a stronger squeezing effect. This is also a general trend that is observed in the experiments in Figure 20. Intuitively, since the model is already confident that $y$ cannot be the correct label (i.e., $p_{y}$ is very small), letting the model further decrease the prediction on $p_{y}$ does not make sense. We can also use the analysis above to understand how it happens. As illustrated in Equation (40), where the value of $\beta$ is decomposed into three subgroups, recall the definition of $\alpha_{i}$, we know all $\beta_{j} < 1$ contribute to the hypothesis that $p_{i}$ increases after this update, where the strength of this contribution is controlled by $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$. Since a $p_{y}^{t}$ small means a small $e^{z_{j}^{t}}$, the influence of $\beta_{j=y} \ll 1$ is significantly weakened under this scenario. In other words, $\alpha_{i} < 1$ is more likely to occur for all possible $i$, which means the squeezing effect (all $p_{j \neq y}$ decreases) becomes more serious.

**Claim 5:** The learning rate with a larger absolute value $|\eta|$ and a larger feature norm $\|\phi(\mathbf{x})\|_{2}^{2}$ will amplify all the trends, maybe more seriously than our expectation. Throughout our analysis, the equivalent learning rate $\eta' < 0$ is a shared scalar in all $\beta_{j}$. Hence larger $|\eta'|$ can amplify all the trends aforementioned. Furthermore, recall the shape of an exponential function $e^{x}$, where a small change of $x$ (especially when $x > 1$) will make $e^{x}$ change a lot. Then the terms $\beta_{j \neq y} = e^{-\eta'(1 + p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t})}$ in Case 1 and $\beta_{j=y} = e^{-\eta'(p_{j}^{t} - p_{i}^{t} - 1)}$ in Case 2 will play a stronger role if we use a larger learning rate $|\eta|$ or the norm of features is larger.

### E.2 Verify the Squeezing Effect Using a Simple Experiment

Let us analyze a simple example to get an intuition. We set $V = 50$, $d = 5$, $|\eta| = 0.5$, and a randomly generated $\phi(\mathbf{x})$. In the first row of Figure 20, we consider the model updates its parameters using standard SGD assuming the label of this $\mathbf{x}$ is 21. Specifically, we randomly generate $\mathbf{w}^{0}$ by sampling each parameter from a standard Gaussian distribution and calculate $\mathbf{w}^{1}$ using Equation (33). The two curves in each panel demonstrate the model's predicted distribution before and after this update. As we expected, the positive vector on the 21st class "pulls up" $\mathbf{p}^{0}(y=21)$ and "pushes down" all other $\mathbf{p}^{1}(y)$ at the same time. This trend is quite consistent under different settings (i.e., different choices of $V$, $d$, $\mathbf{x}$, $\eta$, $\mathbf{w}^{0}$, etc.), which can be depicted by the first panel in Figure 19.

We then set $\eta = -0.5$ to simulate the negative gradient in DPO and consider three different settings. First, we assume the model's prediction on $\mathbf{x}$ is relatively flat, as demonstrated in the second row of Figure 20, where the predicting probability of every class is around 0.02. The negative gradient is imposed on $y = 42$, a randomly selected number. We see the negative adaptation vector "pushes down" $\mathbf{p}^{1}(y=42)$ heavily and re-assigns those decreased probability mass evenly to all other classes, as illustrated in the second panel in Figure 19.

Although the behavior described above follows our intuitions well, a flat $\mathbf{p}^{0}$ is not common in LLM's finetuning. Because finetuning usually starts from a pre-trained $\mathbf{w}$, where the model's prediction would likely be non-uniform. So in the third row of Figure 20, we consider a more practical $\mathbf{w}^{0}$ that leads to a multi-mode $\mathbf{p}^{0}$. In this example, the model has relatively high confidence in classes 5 to 11 and low confidence in all other dimensions. We set the target label as 11 (i.e., the one in the model has the highest confidence) and use $\eta = -0.5$ to "push down" the model's prediction on this class. As demonstrated by the blue curve, $\mathbf{p}^{1}(y=11)$ decreases a lot as we expected. However, different from the flat $\mathbf{p}^{0}$ case, where the model evenly assigns the reduced probability mass to all other $y$, the model in this example **"squeezes"** the mass to those confident predictions, i.e., classes 6, 9, and 10, leaving the confidence of other classes almost unchanged. Such a trend is consistent when the negative gradient is imposed on the "peaky" region of a non-uniform distribution, as illustrated in the third panel in Figure 19.

The previous setting simulates the on-policy DPO well, where the rejected examples $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ are sampled from the high confidence region of the model's predictions. Then, what will happen if we conduct off-policy DPO and impose a big negative gradient on those classes that already have very low confidence? See the fourth row of Figure 20, where we use the same $\mathbf{w}^{0}$ and $\eta$ as in the previous case. The only difference is that we change the label of $\mathbf{x}$ to 42, where $\mathbf{p}^{0}(y=42)$ is very small (roughly $10^{-5}$) before training. The behavior in this setting is quite interesting: we first observe a big increase on $\mathbf{p}^{1}(y=11)$, which means the model "squeezes" the probability mass to the most confident one in $\mathbf{p}^{0}$, similar to the previous setting. More interesting, the predictions on all other $y$ are heavily **"pushed down"**, even including classes 6, 9, and 10, whose confidence is relatively high before training. In the last two panels of Figure 20, we set $V = 1000$ and find this trend is more obvious (that might be because the absolute value of the efficient learning rate, which depends on $\|\phi(\mathbf{x})\|$, becomes larger). Since the vocabulary size of a common LLM is usually more than 50k, the squeezing effect in real systems would be non-negligible even if the learning rate is small. Such a trend is also quite consistent as long as we impose a big negative gradient on the "valley" region of the model's prediction, as illustrated in the last panel in Figure 19. Now we can answer the question of why all observing $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ decreases and where the probability mass has gone:

> **For each token, the probability mass is squeezed to the one with the highest confidence.**

Note that the tokens with the highest confidence do not necessarily form a preferred response: it just reinforces the prior knowledge contained in $\theta^{0}$, which could be a drawback for off-policy DPO.

The hypothesis above is not only supported by this simple logistic regression problem but also by many consistent trends in LLM's finetuning experiments. First, by comparing the average decaying speed of the $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ when the model SFTs different epochs before DPO (in Figure 17), we notice that longer SFT leads to a more peaky $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{0}}(\mathbf{y})$ and hence leads to a faster decaying speed of all non-argmax responses. That is because the longer SFT stage will eventually push down $\pi_{\theta^{0}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ more. Hence in the DPO stage, the big negative gradient is imposed on a deeper valley region, which makes the squeezing effect stronger. Second, to directly verify this hypothesis, we track the sum of the log-likelihood of the tokens with the largest confidence and call it **"argmax confidence"**, i.e., $\sum_{l} \pi_{\theta^{t}}(\arg\max_{\mathbf{y}_{l} \in \mathcal{V}_{l}} \mathbf{y}_{l} \mid \mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{1:l-1})$. As illustrated in the last panel in Figure 4, the argmax confidence **keeps increasing** while all other $\pi_{\boldsymbol{\theta}^{t}}(\mathbf{y})$ decreases: the missing probability mass is found! Last, in the dataset-extension method we proposed in Section 4.3 and Appendix F, we train the model using both $[\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$ and $[\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}]$ during SFT to also "pull up" the $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ region before conducting DPO. Then, we observe compared with the standard training flow, i.e., SFT using $[\mathbf{x}; \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}]$ first and then DPO, the proposed flow has a lower **"argmax confidence"** during DPO. That is because we pulled up $\pi_{\theta^{0}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ during the modified SFT stage, the big negative gradient is then imposed on the peaky region rather than the valley region of the model's prediction. Such a change in turn weakens the squeezing effect, as illustrated in Figure 5.
