## Abstract

**Learning dynamics**, which describes how the learning of specific training examples influences the model's predictions on other examples, gives us a powerful tool for understanding the behavior of deep learning systems. We study the learning dynamics of large language models during different types of finetuning, by analyzing the step-wise decomposition of how influence accumulates among different potential responses. Our framework allows a uniform interpretation of many interesting observations about the training of popular algorithms for both instruction tuning and preference tuning. In particular, we propose a hypothetical explanation of why specific types of hallucination are strengthened after finetuning, e.g., the model might use phrases or facts in the response for question B to answer question A, or the model might keep repeating similar simple phrases when generating responses. We also extend our framework and highlight a unique **"squeezing effect"** to explain a previously observed phenomenon in off-policy direct preference optimization (DPO), where running DPO for too long makes even the desired outputs less likely. This framework also provides insights into where the benefits of on-policy DPO and other variants come from. The analysis not only provides a novel perspective of understanding LLM's finetuning but also inspires a simple, effective method to improve alignment performance. Code for experiments is available at https://github.com/Joshua-Ren/Learning_dynamics_LLM.

---

## 1 Introduction

Deep neural networks usually acquire new knowledge by updating their parameters via gradient descent (GD). This procedure can be described by **learning dynamics**, which links changes in the model's predictions to the gradients generated by learning specific examples. With the help of learning dynamics, researchers have not only explained many interesting phenomena during training, e.g., the "zig-zag" learning path (Ren et al. [37]) and the formation of compositional concept space (Park et al. [29]), but used these insights to propose novel, improved algorithms in different problems (e.g. Pruthi et al. [30]; Ren, S. Guo, et al. [34]; Xia et al. [48]).

The study of large language models (LLMs) is gaining popularity due to their surprising capabilities on various tasks. To ensure the LLMs follow human instructions and align well with human preferences, finetuning has attracted much recent attention. Practitioners often start with **instruction tuning**, where the model learns extra knowledge necessary for the downstream task, and then **preference tuning**, where the model aligns its outputs to human preference (Ouyang et al. [27]). Various finetuning algorithms have been proposed to fit into this pipeline, with differing explanations as to why they improve the model's performance.

Contrary to most existing analyses of LLM finetuning, which use the perspective of their training targets, their status at the end of training, or their relationships to reinforcement learning (e.g. Ji et al. [22]; Rafailov et al. [31]; Tajwar et al. [42]), this paper tries to understand LLMs' evolution from a **dynamical perspective**. Specifically, we formalize the learning dynamics of LLM finetuning by decomposing the change of the model's prediction into three terms which play different roles. This framework can be easily adapted to various finetuning algorithms with different goals, including supervised finetuning (`SFT`, Wei et al. [46]), direct preference optimization (`DPO`, Rafailov et al. [32], and its variants) and even reinforcement learning based methods (e.g., `PPO`, Schulman et al. [40]). This framework helps explain several interesting and counter-intuitive observations during training — including the **"repeater" phenomenon** after preference tuning (Holtzman et al. [19]), hallucination (L. Huang et al. [20]), the **decay in confidence of all responses** during off-policy DPO (Rafailov et al. [31]), and more.

Moreover, we also provide a new perspective on understanding why off-policy DPO and other variants underperform their on-policy counterparts (S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. [16]). Our explanation starts by observing an interesting **"squeezing effect,"** which we demonstrate is a consequence of gradient ascent (as in DPO and similar algorithms) on models with cross-entropy loss following a softmax layer. In short, for each token's prediction, the negative gradient will push down the model's predictions on (almost) all possible output labels, moving this probability mass to the most-likely labels. This can be detrimental to the alignment we are trying to achieve. This effect is most serious when the negative gradient is imposed on an already-unlikely label, which is why the confidence of almost all responses decreases during off-policy DPO. Inspired by this, we propose a simple but very effective method to further improve alignment performance.
