## F A Simple Method to Improve Alignment

### F.1 Pinpointing the Drawback of Off-Policy DPO

Based on our observations and analysis above, we speculate that **"imposing big negative gradients on the valley region"** is one of the bottlenecks of off-policy RL-free methods. Starting from this hypothesis, we believe introducing on-policy sampling has the potential to mitigate this problem, as demonstrated in SPIN (Z. Chen et al. [7]) and other online algorithms (S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. [16]). However, we also speculate that these methods improve the model's performance not only by mitigating the squeezing effect. Hence to figure out to what extent the squeezing effect can harm the model's performance, we propose a simple yet effective method to isolate its influence. As this method can directly mitigate this effect, it can also be considered as an ablation study of this interesting phenomenon.

### F.2 A Simple Method Inspired by Learning Dynamics

As illustrated in Figure 21, where the baseline method is a standard SFT-then-DPO pipeline, the proposed method is very simple. We only need to **augment the dataset used in SFT** by adding $(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ pairs for each sample into it. All other settings are unchanged. The motivation for this method is also quite simple: as SFT can pull up the region of supervised $\mathbf{y}$ and we don't want the model to impose big negative gradients on a valley region, we can just pull up those $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ before DPO. Furthermore, as demonstrated in the third panel in Figure 19 and Equation (15), the negative gradient in DPO would be strong enough to push down $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ because the gradient will be large if the model cannot separate $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+}$ and $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ well. In other words, under DPO's loss, there is **no need to worry about the model overfitting** those $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ during SFT.

### F.3 Experimental Verification

To verify our analysis, we conduct experiments by finetuning a pretrained `Qwen1.5-1.8B` (J. Bai et al. [3]) model using Anthropic-HH dataset (Y. Bai et al. [4]) (we use a subset containing 5000 random examples from the training split). The pipelines of different methods are demonstrated in Figure 21. In this experiment, we call the pretrained model $B_{0}$ (and $E_{0}$, which is identical to $B_{0}$), which is an official checkpoint pretrained by J. Bai et al. [3]. Model $B_{1}$ and $E_{1}$ are the ones after SFT, which are different for these two methods. Model $B_{2-2/4/6}$ and $E_{2-2/4/6}$ are the models finetuned using DPO for 2/4/6 epochs. All the settings (except the starting model) of the DPO stage are the same for these two methods.

We first observe the learning dynamics of these two methods in Figure 5, where all the trends support our analysis quite well. See the first two panels that compare $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+})$ and $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ respectively. It is clear that these two methods have an almost identical curve on $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{+})$ in the SFT stage but behave quite differently on $\pi_{\theta^{t}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$: because we directly train the model using $(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ in the proposed method. Then, after the SFT stage, we conduct DPO using identical settings for these two methods. From the first three panels, we can observe the **decay speed of all curves of the proposed method is smaller** than its counterpart in the baseline. That is the benefit introduced by "pulling up" the $\pi_{\theta^{0}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ region before conducting DPO. With this specific design, the big negative gradients in DPO are imposed on the peaky region (the behavior is like the third panel in Figure 19) rather than the valley region (see the fourth panel), hence the squeezing effect is successfully restrained. The results in the last panel of Figure 5 are also a strong verification of the whole picture. During the SFT stage, the observed "argmax-probability" of the proposed method is higher than the baseline, because we impose twice the "pull up" pressure, i.e., those for $(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$, compared with the baseline. However, at the beginning of DPO, we observe a clear drop in the orange curve. That is because the negative gradients are exactly imposed on those $\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-}$ (in the second panel of Figure 5, $\pi_{\theta^{0}}(\mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ is already very high). Furthermore, at the end of DPO, we see the "argmax-probability" of the proposed method is significantly lower than the baseline setting, which implies that the squeezing effect is restrained in our setting.

In order to figure out whether the model trained using the proposed flow, which successfully restrains the squeezing effect, indeed does alignment better, we conduct pair-wise comparisons of these models' responses and report their win rate as in Rafailov et al. [32]. Specifically, we first randomly select 1000 test questions from the test split of Anthropic-HH and generate 1000 responses by feeding the prompts to each of these models (we use the default sampling setting provided in Rafailov et al. [32]). Then, with the prompt template provided in Figure 23, we evaluate the win rate of the response pairs using **GPT3.5-Turbo** and **Claude3-Haiku**. Here we report the average win rate of different comparisons (the degenerated responses are not compared, so the number of compared examples is slightly smaller than 1000). Note that a win rate greater than 0.5 means the method that comes first is preferred by the evaluator.

**1. Compare models after SFT:** $E_{1}$ vs. $B_{1}$, win rate is **0.4729** and **0.4679**;

**2. Demonstrate benefits of DPO:**
- a. $B_{2-4}$ vs. $B_{1}$, win rate is **0.6727** and **0.6411**;
- b. $E_{2-4}$ vs. $E_{1}$, win rate is **0.6898** and **0.7321**;

**3. Compare the proposed method and baseline after DPO for different epochs:**
- a. $E_{2-2}$ vs. $B_{2-2}$, win rate is **0.6518** and **0.5151**;
- b. $E_{2-4}$ vs. $B_{2-4}$, win rate is **0.6928** and **0.6045**;
- c. $E_{2-6}$ vs. $B_{2-6}$, win rate is **0.6667** and **0.5432**;

**4. Compare the best $E_{2-4}$ with other 2 checkpoints:**
- a. $E_{2-4}$ vs. $E_{2-2}$, win rate is **0.6853** and **0.5517**;

In the first comparison, we find the model trained using both $(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{+})$ and $(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}_{u}^{-})$ loses more (win rate is smaller than 0.5), which makes sense because $E_{1}$ assigns higher probabilities on those less preferred responses. In the second comparison, the model fine-tuned using DPO indeed aligns with human value better. The win rate of the proposed method is slightly higher, which might also be explained as $E_{1}$ leaving more space for improvement. Hence we then directly compare the models after DPO in these two methods in the third group. In this group, all models in the proposed method **win the baseline counterparts by a large margin**, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed method. Furthermore, we find the evaluation made by Claude is more reserved compared with GPT (the numbers are smaller). However, the trends among the comparisons in this group are consistent: $E_{2-4}$ brings the largest improvement, which is potentially the best model. This fact is verified in the fourth group comparison, where we evaluate $E_{2-4}$ against $E_{2-2}$ and $E_{2-6}$. The results demonstrate that both a too-long or too-short finetuning stage using DPO is not the best choice.

Figure 23 shows the prompt used for evaluating model's response (from Rafailov et al. [32]), an example feedback from GPT3.5-turbo, and two examples of the **"degenerate"** effect described in Holtzman et al. [19]. Although both $B_{2}$ and $E_{2}$ inevitably generate such degenerate responses, we find this phenomenon is less common in the proposed method.
