## 4. Discussion

We have presented a framework for categorizing neural network scaling laws, along with derivations that help to explain their origins. Crucially, our predictions agree with empirical findings in settings which have often proven challenging for theory — deep neural networks on real datasets. The variance-scaling regime yields, for smooth test losses, a universal prediction of $\alpha_{D} = 1$ (for $D \gg P$) and $\alpha_{W} = 1$ (for $w \gg D$). The resolution-limited regime yields exponents whose numerical value is variable and data- and model-dependent.

There are a number of intriguing directions for future work. The invariance of the dataset scaling exponent to superclassing (Figure 3) suggests that deep networks may be largely learning properties of the input data manifold — akin to unsupervised learning — rather than significant task-specific structure, which may shed light on the versatility of learned deep network representations for different downstream tasks. Another direction for future research is to more explicitly derive within the theory the effects of "feature learning." While the random feature linear models we have discussed are in exact correspondence with deep neural networks in the large-width limit and have been a useful theoretical testbed across a variety of problems, the kernels associated with networks of finite-depth and finite-width evolve dynamically during the course of training.

### 4.1 Limitations

One limitation is that our theoretical results are asymptotic, while experiments are performed with finite models and datasets. This is apparent in the resolution-limited regime which requires a hierarchy ($D \gg P$ or $P \gg D$). In Figures 1a and 2a top-right (bottom-left), we see a breakdown of the predicted scaling behavior as $D$ ($P$) become large and the hierarchy is lost. Furthermore, in the resolution-limited regime for deep networks, our theoretical tools rely on positing the existence of a data manifold. A precise definition of the data manifold, however, is lacking, forcing us to use imperfect proxies, such as the nearest-neighbor distances of final embedding layers from a trained network.

---

## 5. Outlook

Modern deep learning, in the era of large datasets, models, and computational power, has often made progress through extensive amounts of experimentation and trial-and-error. A theoretical understanding of deep learning that is grounded in experiments and strives to bridge the gap between mathematically rigorous theory on the one hand, and realistic settings on the other, could be scientifically important for guiding the field. Our treatment of neural scaling laws in this work touches on classic aspects of generalization within learning theory but derives new results through realistic data assumptions and identifying and deriving a taxonomy for scaling regimes. Our approach is guided by the theoretical simplicity, realistic modeling, and experimental verification that is characteristic of theory construction in physics; we also leverage results from statistical physics approaches to deep learning in our derivations.

Looking further afield, it is an interesting question whether qualitatively new behavior can emerge in large neural models trained on rich datasets, or whether such models are natural extensions of smaller-scale models. The exploration of so-called emergent abilities within neural-based language models is an active area of research. Further investigation into these questions through the theoretical methods and scientific approaches of physics — calling for a realistic modeling of data and neural representations — may help shed light on our understanding of learning in deep neural networks.

**Acknowledgements.** The authors would like to thank Guy Gur-Ari, Boris Hanin, Tom Henighan, Danny Hernandez, Aitor Lewkowycz, Sam McCandlish, Preetum Nakkiran, Behnam Neyshabur, Jeffrey Pennington, Vinay Ramasesh, Dan Roberts, Jonathan Rosenfeld, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Lechao Xiao for conversations during the completion of this work. US completed a portion of this work during an internship at Google. JK and US were supported in part by Open Philanthropy.
